---
sidebar_position: 52
---

# W0052 - Avoid `catch`

## Warning

```erlang
-module(main).
-export([catcher/2]).

catcher(X,Y) ->
case catch X/Y of
  %% ^^^^^ warning: Avoid `catch`.
  {'EXIT', {badarith,_}} -> "uh oh";
  N -> N
end.
```

## Explanation

`try ... catch ... end` in Erlang has been available for a very long time, and
the old, simplistic `catch Expr` will be dropped from the language. In most
places where it is used, it carries with it some unwanted (and often unknown)
corner case behaviour, such as discarding the original error location,
conflating errors, exits, and throws, and mixing up thrown values with normally
returned values in a way that makes it very hard to see what the author
intended, and whether the implementation really does what they hoped.
Maintainance of such code is very hard.

Starting with Erlang OTP 28, it will be possible to enable warnings for use of
old-style `catch` expressions via the `warn_deprecated_catch` flag. The
old-style catch will be deprecated and removed in a future version of OTP (most
likely OTP 29 or OTP 30). Therefore, it is recommended to avoid switching to
`try ... catch ... end`.

## Examples

Let's consider the following example:

```erlang
case catch api() of
  {'EXIT', Reason} ->
    caught_it;
  _ ->
    other
end.
```

First notice that this always returns `other` if `api()` calls `throw(...)`
because `foo = (catch throw(foo))`. We only get something interesting if `api()`
calls `exit(...)`. So, if your goal was to do something special when there is an
exception, `case catch` is definitely not what you want.

If you only want to catch exits, it might work, unless the API legitimately
returns a tuple with first element being `'EXIT'`. So, this pattern is brittle
and does not generalize. Here is a bette way:

```erlang
try api() of
  _ ->
    other
catch
  _:_ ->
    caught_it
end.
```

It is only one line longer than `case catch`, does not miss `throw()`s, has less
runtime overhead, has 15 fewer characters, and never trips on special return
values of functions.

One case where using `try/catch` is more cumbersome is if you want to treat
exceptions and unexpected return values the same. In that case you may want to
do:

```erlang
case catch api() of
    expected -> continue_processing();
    Other -> handle_unexpected(Other)
end.
```

However, if `api()` calls `throw(expected)` it gets treated the same as if it
returns expected. This makes the intended interface of `api()` unclear. So, it
is still recommended to use `try/catch` for this case:

```erlang
try api() of
    expected -> continue_processing();
    Other -> handle_unexpected(Other)
catch
    Type:Reason -> handle_unexpected(Type, Reason)
end.
```

It is more verbose but makes the interface and control flow clear.

## See also

- [Errors and Error Handling](https://www.erlang.org/doc/system/errors.html)
- [Deprecating catch in Erlang](https://github.com/erlang/otp/pull/9154)
- [Erlang 'catch' expression vs try/catch in terms of efficiency](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/46885820/erlang-catch-expression-vs-try-catch-in-terms-of-efficiency)
- [Dealing with exceptions](https://learnyousomeerlang.com/errors-and-exceptions)
